Now old desire doth in hisdeath-bed lie,
And young affection gapesto be his heir;
That fair for which lovegroan'd for and would die,
With tender Julietmatch'd, is now not fair.
Now Romeo is beloved andloves again,
Alike betwitched by thecharm of looks,
But to his foe supposed hemust complain,
And she steal love's sweetbait from fearful hooks:
Being held a foe, he maynot have access
To use those vows aslovers use to swear;
And she as much in love,her means much less
To meet her new-belovedany where:
But passion lends thempower, time means, to meet
Tempering extremities withextreme sweet.
Can I go forward when myheart is here?
Turn back, dull earth, andfind thy centre out.
My cousin Romeo!
Romeo!
He is wise;
And, on my life, hathstol'n him home to bed.
He ran this way, andleap'd that orchard wall:
Call, good Mercutio.
Nay, I'll conjure too.
Romeo!
Humours!
Madman!
Passion!
Lover!
Appear thou in thelikeness of a sigh:
Speak but one rhyme, and Iam satisfied;
Cry but 'Ay me!' pronouncebut 'love' and 'dove;'
Speak to my gossip Venusone fair word,
One nick-name for herpurblind son and heir.
He heareth not, hestirreth not, he movethnot;
The ape is dead, and Imust conjure him.
I conjure thee byRosaline's bright eyes,
By her high forehead andher scarlet lip,
By her fine foot, straightleg and quivering thigh
And the demesnes thatthere adjacent lie,
That in thy likeness thouappear to us!
And if he hear thee, thouwilt anger him.
This cannot anger him:'twould anger him
To raise a spirit in hismistress' circle
Of some strange nature,letting it there stand
Till she had laid it andconjured it down;
That were some spite: myinvocation
Is fair and honest, and inhis mistress' name
I conjure only but toraise up him.
Come, he hath hid himselfamong these trees,
To be consorted with thehumorous night:
Blind is his love and bestbefits the dark.
If love be blind, lovecannot hit the mark.
Now will he sit under amedlar tree,
And wish his mistress werethat kind of fruit
That maids call medlars,when they laugh alone.
O, Romeo, that she were,O, that she were
An open et caetera, thou apoperin pear!
Romeo, good night: I'll tomy truckle-bed;
This field-bed is too coldfor me to sleep:
Come, shall we go?
Go, then; for 'tis in vain
To seek him here thatmeans not to be found.
He jests at scars thatnever felt a wound.
But, soft!
What light through yonderwindow breaks?
It is the east, and Julietis the sun.
Arise, fair sun, and killthe envious moon,
Who is already sick andpale with grief,
That thou her maid art farmore fair than she:
Be not her maid, since sheis envious;
Her vestal livery is butsick and green
And none but fools do wearit; cast it off.
It is my lady,
O, it is my love!
O, that she knew she were!
She speaks yet she saysnothing: what of that?
Her eye discourses; I willanswer it.
I am too bold, 'tis not tome she speaks:
Two of the fairest starsin all the heaven,
Having some business, doentreat her eyes
To twinkle in theirspheres till they return.
What if her eyes werethere, they in her head?
The brightness of hercheek would shame thosestars,
As daylight doth a lamp;her eyes in heaven
Would through the airyregion stream so bright
That birds would sing andthink it were not night.
See, how she leans hercheek upon her hand!
O, that I were a gloveupon that hand,
That I might touch thatcheek!
Ay me!
She speaks: O, speakagain, bright angel!
For thou art
As glorious to this night,being o'er my head
As is a winged messengerof heaven
Unto the white-upturnedwondering eyes
Of mortals that fall backto gaze on him
When he bestrides thelazy-pacing clouds
And sails upon the bosomof the air.
O Romeo, Romeo!
Wherefore art thou Romeo?
Deny thy father and refusethy name;
Or, if thou wilt not, bebut sworn my love,
And I'll no longer be aCapulet.
Shall I hear more, orshall I speak at this?
'Tis but thy name that ismy enemy;
Thou art thyself, thoughnot a Montague.
What's Montague? it is norhand, nor foot,
Nor arm, nor face, nor anyother part
Belonging to a man.
O, be some other name!
What's in a name? thatwhich we call a rose
By any other name wouldsmell as sweet;
So Romeo would, were henot Romeo call'd,
Retain that dearperfection which he owes
Without that title.
Romeo, doff thy name,
And for that name which isno part of thee
Take all myself.
I take thee at thy word:
Call me but love, and I'llbe new baptized;
Henceforth I never will beRomeo.
What man art thou thatthus bescreen'd in night
So stumblest on mycounsel?
By a name I know not howto tell thee who I am:
My name, dear saint, ishateful to myself,
Because it is an enemy tothee;
Had I it written, I wouldtear the word.
My ears have not yet drunka hundred words
Of thy tongue's uttering,yet I know the sound:
Art thou not Romeo and aMontague?
Neither, fair maid, ifeither thee dislike.
How camest thou hither,tell me, and wherefore?
The orchard walls are highand hard to climb,
And the place death,considering who thou art,
If any of my kinsmen findthee here.
With love's light wingsdid I o'er-perch thesewalls;
For stony limits cannothold love out,
And what love can do thatdares love attempt;
Therefore thy kinsmen areno stop to me.
If they do see thee, theywill murder thee.
Alack, there lies moreperil in thine eye
Than twenty of theirswords: look thou butsweet,
And I am proof againsttheir enmity.
I would not for the worldthey saw thee here.
I have night's cloak tohide me from their eyes;
And but thou love me, letthem find me here:
My life were better endedby their hate,
Than death prorogued,wanting of thy love.
By whose directionfound'st thou out thisplace?
By love, who first didprompt me to inquire;
He lent me counsel and Ilent him eyes.
I am no pilot; yet, wertthou as far
As that vast shore wash'dwith the farthest sea,
I should adventure forsuch merchandise.
Thou know'st the mask ofnight is on my face,
Else would a maiden blushbepaint my cheek
For that which thou hastheard me speak to-night.
Fain would I dwell onform, fain, fain deny
What I have spoke: butfarewell compliment!
Dost thou love me?
I know thou wilt say 'Ay,'
And I will take thy word:yet if thou swear'st,
Thou mayst prove false; atlovers' perjuries
They say, Jove laughs.
O gentle Romeo,
If thou dost love,pronounce it faithfully:
Or if thou think'st I amtoo quickly won,
I'll frown and be perversean say thee nay,
So thou wilt woo; butelse, not for the world.
In truth, fair Montague, Iam too fond,
And therefore thou maystthink my 'havior light:
But trust me, gentleman,I'll prove more true
Than those that have morecunning to be strange.
I should have been morestrange, I must confess,
But that thouoverheard'st, ere I wasware,
My true love's passion:therefore pardon me,
And not impute thisyielding to light love,
Which the dark night hathso discovered.
Lady, by yonder blessedmoon I vow
That tips with silver allthese fruit-tree tops--
O, swear not by the moon,the inconstant moon,
That monthly changes inher circled orb,
Lest that thy love provelikewise variable.
What shall I swear by?
Do not swear at all;
Or, if thou wilt, swear bythy gracious self,
Which is the god of myidolatry.
If my heart's dear love--
Well, do not swear:although I joy in thee,
I have no joy of thiscontract to-night:
It is too rash, toounadvised, too sudden;
Too like the lightning,which doth cease to be
Ere one can say 'Itlightens.'
Sweet, good night!
This bud of love, bysummer's ripening breath,
May prove a beauteousflower when next we meet.
Good night, good night! assweet repose and rest
Come to thy heart as thatwithin my breast!
O, wilt thou leave me sounsatisfied?
What satisfaction canstthou have to-night?
The exchange of thy love'sfaithful vow for mine.
I gave thee mine beforethou didst request it:
And yet I would it were togive again.
Wouldst thou withdraw it?For what purpose, love?
But to be frank, and giveit thee again.
And yet I wish but for thething I have:
My bounty is as boundlessas the sea,
My love as deep; the moreI give to thee,
The more I have, for bothare infinite.
I hear some noise within;dear love, adieu!
Anon, good nurse!
Sweet Montague, be true.
Stay but a little, I willcome again.
O blessed, blessed night!
I am afeard,
Being in night, all thisis but a dream,
Too flattering-sweet to besubstantial.
Three words, dear Romeo,and good night indeed.
If that thy bent of lovebe honourable,
Thy purpose marriage--
Yes.
send me word to-morrow,
By one that I'll procureto come to thee,
Where and what time thouwilt perform the rite;
And all my fortunes at thyfoot I'll lay
And follow thee my lordthroughout the world.
Madam!
I come, anon.
But if thou mean'st notwell, I do beseech thee--
Madam!
By and by, I come:--
To cease thy suit, andleave me to my grief:
To-morrow will I send.
So thrive my soul.
A thousand times goodnight!
A thousand times theworse, to want thy light.
Love goes toward love, asschoolboys from theirbooks,
But love from love, towardschool with heavy looks.
Hist! Romeo, hist!
O, for a falconer's voice,
To lure this tassel-gentleback again!
Bondage is hoarse, and maynot speak aloud;
Else would I tear the cavewhere Echo lies,
And make her airy tonguemore hoarse than mine,
With repetition of myRomeo's name.
Romeo!
It is my soul that callsupon my name:
How silver-sweet soundlovers' tongues by night,
Like softest music toattending ears!
Romeo!
My sweet.
At what o'clock to-morrowShall I send to thee?
By the hour of nine.
I shall not fail: 'tistwenty years till then.
I have forgot why I didcall thee back.
Let me stand here tillthou remember it.
I shall forget, to havethee still stand there,
Remembering how I love thycompany.
And I'll still stay, tohave thee still forget,
Forgetting any other homebut this.
'Tis almost morning; Iwould have thee gone:
And yet no further than awanton's bird;
That lets it hop a littlefrom her hand,
Like a poor prisoner inhis twisted gyves,
And with a silk threadplucks it back again,
So loving-jealous of hisliberty.
I would I were thy bird.
Sweet, so would I:
But I should kill theewith much cherishing.
Good night, good night!parting is such sweetsorrow,
That I shall say goodnight till it be morrow.
Sleep dwell upon thineeyes, peace in thy breast!
Would I were sleep andpeace, so sweet to rest!
The grey-eyed morn smileson the frowning night,
Chequering the easternclouds with streaks oflight,
And flecked darkness likea drunkard reels
From forth day's path andTitan's fiery wheels:
Now, ere the sun advancehis burning eye,
The day to cheer andnight's dank dew to dry,
I must up-fill this osiercage of ours
With baleful weeds andprecious-juiced flowers.
The earth that's nature'smother is her tomb;
What is her burying gravethat is her womb,
And from her womb childrenof divers kind
We sucking on her naturalbosom find.
O, mickle is the powerfulgrace that lies
In plants, herbs, stones,and their true qualities:
For nought so vile that onthe earth doth live
But to the earth somespecial good doth give,
Nor aught so good butstrain'd from that fairuse
Revolts from true birth,stumbling on abuse.
Within the infant rind ofthis weak flower
Poison hath residence andmedicine power:
For this, being smelt,with that part cheers eachpart;
Being tasted, slays allsenses with the heart.
Two such opposed kingsencamp them still
In man as well as herbs,grace and rude will;
And where the worser ispredominant,
Full soon the canker deatheats up that plant.
Good morrow, father.
Benedicite!
What early tongue so sweetsaluteth me?
Young son, it argues adistemper'd head
So soon to bid good morrowto thy bed.
Or if not so, then here Ihit it right,
Our Romeo hath not been inbed to-night.
That last is true; thesweeter rest was mine.
God pardon sin! wast thouwith Rosaline?
With Rosaline, my ghostlyfather?
No; I have forgot thatname, and that name's woe.
That's my good son: wherehast thou been, then?
I'll tell thee, ere thouask it me again.
I have been feasting withmine enemy,
Where on a sudden one hathwounded me,
That's by me wounded: bothour remedies
Within thy help and holyphysic lies:
I bear no hatred, blessedman, for, lo,
My intercession likewisesteads my foe.
Be plain, good son, andhomely in thy drift;
Riddling confession findsbut riddling shrift.
Then plainly know myheart's dear love is set
On the fair daughter ofrich Capulet:
As mine on hers, so hersis set on mine;
And all combined, savewhat thou must combine
By holy marriage: when andwhere and how
We met, we woo'd and madeexchange of vow,
I'll tell thee as we pass;but this I pray,
That thou consent to marryus to-day.
Holy Saint Francis, what achange is here!
Is Rosaline, whom thoudidst love so dear,
So soon forsaken?
Young men's love then lies
Not truly in their hearts,but in their eyes.
Jesu Maria, what a deal ofbrine
Hath wash'd thy sallowcheeks for Rosaline!
How much salt water thrownaway in waste,
To season love, that of itdoth not taste!
Lo, here upon thy cheekthe stain doth sit
Of an old tear that is notwash'd off yet:
If e'er thou wast thyselfand these woes thine,
Thou and these woes wereall for Rosaline:
And art thou changed?
Pronounce this sentencethen,
Women may fall, whenthere's no strength inmen.
Thou chid'st me oft forloving Rosaline.
For doting, not forloving, pupil mine.
And bad'st me bury love.
Not in a grave,
To lay one in, another outto have.
I pray thee, chide me not;her I love now
Doth grace for grace andlove for love allow;
The other did not so.
O, she knew well
Thy love did read by rotethat could not spell.
But come, young waverer,come, go with me,
In one respect I'll thyassistant be;
For this alliance may sohappy prove,
To turn your households'rancour to pure love.
O, let us hence; I standon sudden haste.
Wisely and slow; theystumble that run fast.
Where the devil shouldthis Romeo be?
Came he not home to-night?
Not to his father's; Ispoke with his man.
Ah, that same palehard-hearted wench, thatRosaline,
Torments him so, he willsure run mad.
Tybalt, the kinsman of oldCapulet,
Hath sent a letter to hisfather's house.
A challenge, on my life.
Romeo will answer it.
Any man that can write mayanswer a letter.
Nay, he will answer theletter's master,
how he dares, being dared.
Alas poor Romeo! he isalready dead;
stabbed with a whitewench's black eye;
run through the ear with alove-song;
the very pin of his heartcleft
with the blind bow-boy'sbutt-shaft:
and is he a man toencounter Tybalt?
Why, what is Tybalt?
More than prince of cats.
O, he's the courageouscaptain of compliments.
He fights as you singprick-song,
keeps time, distance, andproportion;
rests me his minim rests,one, two,
and the third in yourbosom:
the very butcher of a silkbutton,
a duellist, a duellist;
a gentleman of the veryfirst house,
of the first and secondcause: ah, the immortalpassado!
The punto reverso!
The hay!
The what?
The pox of such antic,lisping, affectingfantasticoes.
Water! Fresh well water!
These new tuners ofaccents!
By Jesu, a very goodblade!
A very tall man!
A very good whore!
Why, is not this alamentable thing,grandsire,
that we should be thusafflicted
with these strange flies,these fashion-mongers,
these pardone-moi's,
that stand so much on thenew form,
that they cannot sit atease on an old bench?
O, their bones, theirbones!
Here comes Romeo.
Without his roe, like adried herring:
flesh, flesh, how art thoufishified!
Signor Romeo, bon jour!
There's a Frenchsalutation to your Frenchslop.
Good morrow to you both.
You gave us thecounterfeit fairly lastnight.
What counterfeit did Igive you?
The slip, sir, the slip;can you not conceive?
Pardon, good Mercutio, mybusiness was great;
and in such a case as minea man may strain courtesy.
That's as much as to say,such a case as yours
constrains a man to bow inthe hams.
Meaning, to court'sy.
Thou hast most kindly hitit.
A most courteousexposition.
Nay, I am the very pink ofcourtesy.
Pink for flower.
Right.
Why, then is my pump wellflowered.
Come between us, goodBenvolio; my wit faints.
Why, is not this betternow than groaning forlove?
now art thou sociable, nowart thou Romeo;
now art thou what thouart, by art as well as bynature:
for this drivelling loveis like a great natural,
that runs lolling up anddown to hide his bauble ina hole.
Stop there, stop there.
Oh, clumsy--
Here's goodly gear!
A sail, a sail!
Two, two; a shirt and asmock.
Peter!
Anon!
My fan, Peter.
Good Peter, to hide herface; for her fan's thefairer .
God ye good morrow,gentlemen.
God ye good den, fairgentlewoman.
Is it good den?
It is no less, I tell you,
for the bawdy hand of thedial is now upon the prickof .
Out upon you! what a manare you!
One, gentlewoman,
that God hath made forhimself to mar.
By my troth, it is wellsaid; 'for himself tomar,' quoth a?
Gentlemen, can any of youtell me
where I may find the youngRomeo?
I can tell you;
but young Romeo will beolder when you have foundhim
than he was when yousought him:
I am the youngest of thatname, for fault of aworse.
You say well.
Yea, is the worst well?
very well took, i' faith;wisely, wisely.
If you be he, sir, Idesire some confidencewith you.
She will indite him tosome supper.
A bawd, a bawd, a bawd!
So ho!
What hast thou found?
No hare, sir;
unless a hare, sir, in alenten pie,
which is something staleand hoar ere it be spent.
An old hare hoar, And anold hare hoar,
Is very good meat in lentBut a hare that is hoar
Is too much for a score,When it hoars ere it bespent.
Romeo, will you come toyour father's?
We'll to dinner, thither.
I will follow you.
Farewell, ancient lady;farewell.
'Lady, lady.'
I pray you, sir, whatsaucy merchant was this,
that was so full of hisropery?
A gentleman, nurse, thatloves to hear himselftalk,
and will speak more in aminute
than he will stand to in amonth.
An a' speak any thingagainst me, I'll take himdown,
an a' were lustier than heis, and twenty such Jacks;
and if I cannot, I'll findthose that shall.
Scurvy knave!
I am none of hisflirt-gills; I am none ofhis skains-mates.
And thou must stand bytoo,
and suffer every knave touse me at his pleasure?
I saw no man use you athis pleasure;
if I had, my weapon shouldquickly have been out,
I warrant you:
I dare draw as soon asanother man,
if I see occasion in agood quarrel,
and the law on my side.
Now, afore God, I am sovexed, every part about mequivers.
Scurvy knave!
Pray you, sir, a word: andas I told you,
my young lady bid meinquire you out;
what she bid me tell you,I'll keep to myself:
but first let me tell ye,if ye should lead her
into a fool's paradise, asthey say,
that were a very grosssort of behavior, as theysay.
Bid her devise
Some means to come toshrift this afternoon;
And there she shall atFriar Laurence' cell
Be shrived and married.
Be trusty, and I'll quitthy pains:
Farewell; commend me tothy mistress.
Now God in heaven blessyou, sir.
Hark you, sir;
my mistress is thesweetest lady.
O Lord, Lord!
when 'twas a littleprating thing:--
There is a nobleman intown, one Paris,
that would fain lay knifeaboard;
but she, good soul,
had as lief see a toad, avery toad, as see him.
I anger her sometimes andtell her
that Paris is the propererman; but, Lord, when I sayso,
I'll warrant you, shelooks as pale
as any clout in the versalworld.
Commend me to thy lady.
Ay, ay, a thousand times.
Peter!
Anon!
The clock struck nine whenI did send the nurse;
In half an hour shepromised to return.
Perchance she cannot meethim: that's not so.
O, she is lame!
Love's heralds should bethoughts,
Which ten times fasterglide than the sun'sbeams,
Driving back shadows overlouring hills.
Now is the sun upon thehighmost hill
Of this day's journey, andfrom nine till twelve
Is three long hours, yetshe is not come.
Had she affections andwarm youthful blood,
She would be as swift inmotion as a ball;
My words would bandy herto my sweet love,
And his to me:
But old folk, many feignas they were dead;
Unwieldy, slow, heavy andpale as lead.
O God, she comes!
O honey nurse, what news?
Hast thou met with him?
Send thy man away.
Peter, stay at the gate.
Now, good sweet nurse,-- OLord, why look'st thousad?
Though news be sad, yettell them merrily;
If good, thou shamest themusic of sweet news
By playing it to me withso sour a face.
I am a-weary, give meleave awhile:
Fie, how my bones ache!what a jaunt have I had!
I would thou hadst mybones, and I thy news:
Nay, come, I pray thee,speak; good, good nurse,speak.
Jesu, what haste? can younot stay awhile?
Do you not see I am out ofbreath?
How art thou out ofbreath, when thou hastbreath
To say to me that thou artout of breath?
The excuse that thou dostmake in this delay
Is longer than the talethou dost excuse.
Is thy news good, or bad?answer to that;
Say either, and I'll staythe circumstance:
Let me be satisfied, is'tgood or bad?
Well, you have made asimple choice;
you know not how to choosea man: Romeo!
no, not he; though hisface be better than anyman's,
yet his leg excels allmen's;
and for a hand, and afoot, and a body,
though they be not to betalked on,
yet are they past compare:
o, he's not the flower ofcourtesy,
yet I'll warrant as gentleas a lamb.
Go thy ways, wench; serveGod.
What, have you dined athome?
No, no: but all this did Iknow before.
What says he of ourmarriage? what of that?
O Lord, how my head aches!what a head have I!
It beats as it would fallin twenty pieces.
My back o' t' otherside,-- O, my back, myback!
Beshrew your heart forsending me about,
To catch my death withjaunting up and down!
I' faith, I am sorry thatthou art not well.
Sweet, sweet, sweet nurse,tell me, what says mylove?
Your love says, like anhonest gentleman,
and a kind, and acourteous, and a handsome,
and, I warrant, a virtuous,--Where is your mother?
Where is my mother! why,she is within;
Where should she be?
How oddly thou repliest!
'Your love says, like anhonest gentleman,
Where is your mother?'
O God's lady dear!
Are you so hot? marry,come up, I trow;
Is this the poultice formy aching bones?
Henceforward do yourmessages yourself.
Here's such a coil! come,what says Romeo?
Have you got leave to goto shrift to-day?
I have.
Then hie you hence toFriar Laurence' cell;
There stays a husband tomake you a wife:
Now comes the wanton bloodup in your cheeks,
They'll be in scarletstraight at any news.
Hie you to church; I mustanother way,
To fetch a ladder, by thewhich your love
Shall climb a bird's nestsoon when it is dark:
I'm the drudge and toil inyour delight,
But you shall bear theburden soon at night.
Go; I'll to dinner: hieyou to the cell.
Hie to high fortune!Honest nurse, farewell.
So smile the heavens uponthis holy act,
That after hours withsorrow chide us not!
Amen, amen! but come whatsorrow can,
It cannot countervail theexchange of joy
That one short minutegives me in her sight:
Do thou but close ourhands with holy words,
Then love-devouring deathdo what he dare;
It is enough I may butcall her mine.
These violent delightshave violent ends.
Therefore love moderately;long love doth so.
Here comes the lady: O, solight a foot
Will ne'er wear out theeverlasting flint:
A lover may bestride thegossamer
That idles in the wantonsummer air,
And yet not fall; so lightis vanity.
Good even to my ghostlyconfessor.
Romeo shall thank thee,daughter, for us both.
Come, come here to me, andwe will make short work;
For, by your leave, youshall not stay alone
Till holy churchincorporate two in one.
Deus Israel...